I warned students that money is the least spiritual of all the courses offered by the English department.
After a semester of looking very, very closely at 200 manuscripts and printed books, what do the students get out of it?
Logic?
Reasoning?
Accuracy?
Certainly not.
Method?
Perhaps a way of looking at a text.
Perhaps just how to open a book.
As I gaze out at this hall filled with bibliographers, my experience rise.
You are good.
Bless you all.
Keep it up.
Just think twice before accepting an assignment to teach it.
We have a wonderful speaker eager to engage us, but this is a business meeting, so please forgive us, Professor, if we transact.
The minutes of the 92nd annual meeting were reported by Pope Mayo,
and published in the papers.
Sunshine, fetched from the blue Pacific, I have basked.
Mr. Barlow has accepted appointment to the finance committee, where his good works continue.
Also, I must thank Marjorie Zike for all she does for us, for her dedication and invention.
Article nine of our 1981 bylaws,
permit the council to elect honorary members.
Two are on our books, David Foxen and E.F.
McKenzie.
A committee of former presidents has recommended Paul Oscar Christeller, whom the council elected this morning, our first American honorary member.
This society has established the Fredson Bowers Award to be granted annually
in support of bibliographical scholarship by the Bibliographical Society London.
This year, the recipient is Dr. Robert Pierce of Alexandria, Virginia, who will essay the printing of Italian language Protestant books outside Italy in the 16th century and their clandestine transport to Italy.
And continuing with the officer's reports
Pope Mayo secretary and R. Dyke was almost going to say damaged people.
That isn't right though, and book thieves are the first to notice how much their fun is curtailed as social outcasts by their colony.
Now some people have more fun with books than other people do.
That is surely the case with our speaker.
no picture of Anthony Grafton would be complete without books.
Not a book, but B-O-O-K-S.
Chicago found him and trained him, A-B-A-M and PhD, and at Princeton he scampered up the academic ladder from assistant professor in 1975 to professor in 1985,
Andrew Mellon Professor, 1988, and Dodge Professor, 1993.
Of all his titles, the one I envy most is the one he held at E-H-E-S-S in 1994, .
Now that's .
Since his student days, the books have simply fallen from his hands.
Joseph Scaliger, Oxford, Forgers and Critics, Princeton,
Defenders of the Text, Harvard.
Joseph Scaliger the Sequel, Oxford.
Commerce with the Class Exhibitioner.
There are the collaborations, heavy ones, and none of us here can forget Rome Reborn, the great Vatican loan exhibition catalog of 1993.
For Professor Grafton, translation is a trade-off.
Forgery is out in German, French, and Italian.
His history of the footnote came out in German translation back in 1995, but the English original is stuck on Upper Garden Street in the offices of the Harvard University Press Good Luck.
His lectureships are international and various, including the George Parker Winship.
In spring term, he will be a Divner Fellow in Cambridge, where he will be as welcome at the Hogan Library
as he is among us here today.
Anthony Grafton, Dodge Professor of History, Princeton University, on Is the History of Reading a Marginal Enterprise, Guillaume Boudet, 1468-1540, and his books.
Your defenders of the text salute you.
Thank you very much for that very kind introduction, and thank you all for this kind welcome.
As you know, every little boy or girl who's born into the world alive is either a little liberal or a little conservatized.
It's also the case, I think, that they're either a little historian or a little art historian teleographer or ecologist
historians are scared of technology and use ugly handouts, whereas those born into the other more fortunate category use visual aids in a more sophisticated kind.
And I'm definitely in the former class, and I hope that will excuse my resorting to the hideous serographic distortion of the three beautiful books that I'll talk to you about eventually.
Well, the history of reading is hot.
Historians, literary critics, practitioners of cultural studies devote books to it.
Collections of articles contribute to it.
Interdisciplinary conferences stage discussions of it.
Young scholars dedicate their dissertations and first articles to it.
Graduate and undergraduate courses try with varied levels of success to survey it.
The most infallible sign that a subdiscipline has really started bubbling is already obvious in many quarters.
That is to say that the history of reading has become the site not only of scholarly research, but also of scholarly warfare.
From the outside, big guns sound.
Fretful students of past politics and economics and social organization, the normal subjects of historians, beseech their besotted book historical colleagues
to get off the dime, to pull their noses out from between the crumbling, cat-bound covers of their old books, and return to the historian's proper place, the archive, where you can study really big questions.
From the inside of the field at the same time, an even more unnerving rattle of small arms fire comes, directed by the book historians at one another as they denounce each other for the eccentricity of their methods, the poverty of their results, the foolishness of their problematics, and the inconsequence of their arguments.
It would take a heart of stone to survey this scene, something more like Egepico's Raft of the Medusa, the Stool of Athens, without smiling.
Now, in one sense, the history of reading isn't one at all, at least in the world of manuscript scholarship.
Students of the classical and biblical traditions in the Western Middle Ages and Renaissance, for example, have always studied the history of reading.
They've always known that the reading of the authoritative texts from Aristotle to the Bible formed the central activity of scholars and students in the age of manuscripts.
And they've always known that the thousands of surviving Latin commentaries on these texts offer by far the richest evidence about how their readers dealt with them.
Scholars as varied as the members of the Warburg Institute and its two incarnations in Hamburg and London, the Oxford medievalists who for generations clustered around R.W.
Hunt and Duke Humphrey's library,
and the New York School of Renaissance Studies associated with your honoree, Paul Oskar Christeller, all reconstructed ergodite and important histories of reading before the field became.
So, of course, have students of many non-Western traditions, from the Chinese to the Sanskrit.
And in recent years, as the study of manuscripts has begun to become what we could genuinely call more inclusive,
Younger students of the reading habits of, for example, religious women and later medieval Italy have begun to apply the same methods to vernacular reading as carried out in less elevated circles with tremendously interesting results.
But in the world of the printed book, the Western printed book, and I think that's the world where all of us here probably feel most unknown, the history of reading is a more recent and a more tender point.
There's a paradox involved.
Soon after its invention, many intellectuals seem to think that printing had made reading less rather than more central to cultural life.
Bacon, Descartes, and their ilk saw printing as
One of the forces, like the invention of the compass and the gunpowder, that it enabled them to clear traditional authorities from the intellectual stage, to show that one should study not the books of men, which merely transmitted traditional errors, but the grander book of God, the natural world itself.
Printing, which made readers conscious of their
ability to choose authorities as they liked, which released them from the need to memorize, which gave them access to a stock of forms of text so large that no single book could any longer claim to be the work of the philosopher, somehow demoted reading from its once primal central position among intellectual activities, so at least an influential line of argument from the late 16th century.
Accordingly, it took a long time for history of reading in the age of the printed book to take shape as a recognizable field.
And when it did so, in the years leading up to the Second World War, it came into being really only because it seemed to offer help in understanding the seismic shift that historians don't view themselves like an explainer.
French scholars, for example, like Daniel Monet and Lucien Feth, assembled evidence about the circulation of
drawing their evidence generally from library catalogs.
Using the history of reading not as an end, but as a means, they hoped that by identifying all the texts read in Reformation, Amiens, or Enlightenment, Paris, they could not feel their way into a particular experience in reading, but understand why the Reformation had come to that one city, or the revolution to France as a whole.
The subversive books of Calvin or Voltaire followed through the history of reading might do something to explain the kinds of large events that earlier historians have studied in the archives.
Finally, however, in the 1960s and 70s, the history of reading came into its own
moved from the sterile clarity of listing titles and looking at title pages into the fascinating void of texts and margins and gutters behind them.
Innovative scholars began to see and to state that reading had a history of its own.
that the experience of texts changed as radically over time in the modern as in the pre-modern world.
Simple lists of which books had been popular in a given place or time couldn't possibly establish how they had actually been read, what impact provided them back in, how they'd been received.
Pioneer historians of the book advanced bold pieces about the transformations reading has undergone.
The German historian Wolf Englitz, for example, suggested in an influential formulation that reading, at least in Germany, remained for centuries after Gutenberg intensive, that readers had or had access to very few books above all the Bible, read them over and over again, memorized them, committed them to their memories, didn't look outside that kind of handle.
In the 18th century, the cheapening of print, the great expansion of vernacular titles, the creation of new genres of entertaining literature, reading went from intensive to extensive, became the state which we now know, the low, idling cunning of books that one looks at at the beach for fun, rather than the intensive screening of text seen as an authority on life, the universe, and everything.
This thesis was, of course, far too beautiful to be true,
But as Karl Popper showed long ago, science makes progress only when conjectures provoke refutations.
The bold hypotheses of brave pioneers like Engelsing, Elizabeth Eisenstein and others attracted many equally bold refutations.
but eventually once fire and sword had fertilized the ground under them something better began to pop up nuanced case studies which sought to look at reading and readers in a particular place in time rather than to show how reading itself had progressed like hegel's geist from one stage to another close attention to the letters
that attended the publication of a single book, enabled Robert Darden, for example, to watch readers respond to Rousseau, as he entitled, one of the classic founding essays of the genre, tracing in detail the formation of a new intimate relationship among printers, authors, and fictional characters, a really fascinating story.
Detailed analysis of other kinds of evidence, from booksellers' letters to financial accounts, permitted Darden to show more recently that when the readers of enlightened Lyon in Paris ordered philosophical books from their friendly local encore Barnes & Noble, they didn't actually have in mind the philosophy of Voltaire and Montesquieu, but salacious fiction or
scatological gossip about the royal family of France.
Monographs of comparable originality and richness shed light on readers' experiences and habits in many different curious places and cultural environments.
Now, Darwin's studies tend to be aimed to shed light at least obliquely on big historical transformations, above all on the French Revolution.
But it seems to me that in the last 10 or 15 years, the tendency of studies in the history of reading has been like the tendency of much work in history at large, rather microscopic.
Historians, Emmanuel de Walla, do we once said fall into two categories, parachutists and truffle hunters.
The parachutists hang high in the air over a field,
summarizing, synthesizing, not worrying too much about the obstacles that might impede progress on the ground.
The truffle hunters bury their noses in a particular source, sniffing it out, delighting in its particularity.
In the last generation, history has been a discipline of truffle hunters.
I'm a truffle hunter myself.
And book history, it seems to me, has really been a paradise for truffle hunting.
Over and over again, historians concerned with the most disparate areas have shown that readers are obstinately, obdurately idiosyncratic.
Librarians, publishers, authors would like readers
always to process what they offer them in a sane, orderly way, would like to know that what goes in will come out in something like its original form.
But readers aren't like that.
They're cappuccino machines.
They pop, they hiss, they send out steam, but occasionally they explode.
And the coffee that they produce will be different from cup to cup, no matter how carefully you may be grounded and measured about.
From Carlo Ginsberg's wonderful study of Monocchio, the Friulian Miller creating a wild new cosmology from the most trivial and well-known texts like Mandeville's cosmology, to Janice Radway's wonderful study of how a group of American women read the paperback novels known in the trade as Bodice Rivers.
The emphasis has been again and again on the creativity of readers
The wonderful and shimmering dreams of freedom and equality that they weave from sources where such dreams are highly unexpected.
It's a wonderful situation, a bit like witnessing a firework display.
Spectacular, great bursts of light, but rather scattered, hard to make into a single pattern.
This impression, I may say, which I'd already formed, was confirmed this year when I organized and taught an undergraduate course on the history of reading through a group of intrepid Princeton juniors and seniors.
I looked and absolutely failed to find a textbook, a single readable book that could guide them through the history of the field.
But I found wonderful monographs, Ginsbergs, Rathways, and many others,
And I found wonderful help from our colleagues in the Department of Rare Books and Special Collections of Princeton, who offered guidance, thanks to their formidable collective memory, into the riches of the collection.
The monographs delighted the students.
They found the particular far more interesting than the general, and they pursued it in their research papers in the most wonderful way.
By the end of the term, in fact, they pretty much ejected everyone else from the rare book of Princeton.
Where one of them sat, transcribed in the notes that Mrs. Thrail had entered in her copy of the tablet, reading riveting details about the street cries that she no longer heard in the London of her old age.
Another worked her way.
grimly but with fortitude through volume after volume of 18th century French pornography, greatly enriching her vocabulary, and the third reconstructed the oral experiences of modernist fiction arranged by Sylvia Leach with the readings and recordings in which she tried to support Shakespeare and Company in his later, more ingenious years.
Two stories below, a fourth student put together an extremely impressive paper on hypertext fiction, with a bibliography several pages long that cites no printed source, but only HTTP colon slash slash sources.
And still fail to convince me of the quality of this.
As the variety of these enterprises suggest, the course as a whole left its participants very much for my own reading.
in a state of happy confusion, convinced of the fascination of individual cases and individual forms of research, but really unable at this point to frame many larger hypotheses from them.
What I will offer you tonight is, in other words, a specimen of truffle hunting, one small segment of history of research as carried out now in departments of history and English, but also in other departments as well.
I hope that it will suggest, more effectively than generalizations could, some of the fascination that this new field of study exercises on those of us who don't have the collective years of engagement with the primary sources of book history to where it comes to more recent discovery, as well as some sense of the intellectuals and more research, telling that these materials from the outside as a historian might occasionally throw up
Now, Guillaume Boudet, my subject, is no longer a household name, even in pretty learned households.
But in his day, he was one of the stateliest humanists in Europe.
The descendant of a great family of civil servants, he studied the Roman law at the University of Orleans, found it hideously boring, and spent several years mostly hunting, until one day, for reasons as mysterious as those of any other religious convert,
He underwent a conversion experience, not to Christianity, but to classicism, to humanism, and began to study the classics of Greek and Latin with a dedication that he never previously showed for any subject.
He rose in the royal bureaucracy, serving as a secretary and ambassador under Charles VIII and Louis XII, retired for a time to private study, but came back to court all guns blazing with the new young king Francis I,
For Francis, he wrote a mirror of princes in French offered the young king instruction on the great deeds of earlier monarchs like Alexander the Great.
Eventually, he convinced Francis to found the royal lectureships in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, which until very recently were always seen as the ancestors of the current political cross, but this argument has recently been called into questions.
As a cultural bureaucrat, in other words, he was one of the great success stories of history.
But Boudet was more than that.
He was also a great intellectual.
He not only helped Francis try to bring Erasmus, the greatest of the North European humanists, to Paris, where there's a wonderful letter, the letter which any academic he has ever had an outside offer must envy.
written by Francis I to Erasmus in very large letters.
Francis didn't use it a lot, one has been fresh.
It's probably the greatest academic offer in history, in my particular game.
As an intellectual, Erasmus Aboudé collaborated with Erasmus.
Both hoped to drive what they called the barbarians, that's to say scholastic philosophers and theologians, from their dominating places in church and universities.
They agreed on a great many points.
They agreed that modern culture must be renewed by making the elite of state and church alike steep themselves in classical learning, the best of Greek and Latin literature.
Both agreed that the church must be renewed as well by direct study of the New Testament.
And by the New Testament, they meant not the Vulgate of the Middle Ages, that Latin text, the Greek
in glosses that turned it into a machine for producing theological propositions, rather they meant the plain Greek New Testament read as a historical record, simple, stark, and powerful of the life and deeds and sufferings of Jesus and his disciples as a model for a moral Christian life in their own time.
This collaboration, which reached its height, its spectacular height in the 15th century,
Brought forth, of course, such famous results as Thomas More's Utopia.
And when this book reached the continent, Boudet wrote a phosphorescent introduction through a reprint of it.
The great French lawyer agreed there enthusiastically with his English legal colleague.
The only way to cleanse society of its problems was to rid it, first of all, of all its lawyers.
It's a really wonderful book.
Patriotism eventually cut the funds between Boudet and Moore.
Hurt feelings, hurt vanity did the same for his friendship for Erasmus who made the dreadful mistake of mentioning Boudetius and Bodius, the great scholar and the publisher in the same sentence because he thought the accidents was cute and infuriated Boudet.
But bad relations with individual classicists
not distract Houdet from his unremitting study of the classics themselves.
Even on his wedding day, after all, he had kept on this customary hour and a half of Greek study, and he retained this habit, I'm not sure if it was a good one, until deep old age.
Houdet, of course, was not just a lawyer, not just a classicist, not just an educational performer who wrote broadsides about the best possible curriculum.
He was also one of the greatest technical scholars Europe had in Europe's greatest age of scholarly eruditions.
His commentary on the Digest, one of the four great treatises of the Roman Corpus Juris, which appeared in 158, was the first effort to analyze that great text not systematically, as medieval jurists brilliantly did, as a treatise directly relevant to the Christian modern society of the 14th and 15th centuries, but historically as a deep and richly detailed record of Roman social, cultural, administrative and institutional history.
His De Asac on the As, which appeared some seven years later, was the first full-scale study of ancient coinage.
Boudet used his calipers and scales, as well as a vast range of ancient texts, to work out exactly the modern value of every ancient coin.
His astonished readers learned that the great order of Democlonies had been quite right when he refused to pay the famous Corpus and Laius before his disperses which he demanded.
40 sesterces amounted to more than 1,750 pounds in the currency, as Boudet pointed out.
And that would have been a far too great a price to pay for a pleasure of which the order would sue
Ode's commentaries on the Greek language, which appeared in 1529, are perhaps his most extraordinary, but also his most inaccessible accomplishment.
This is the first manual of Greek prose usage ever written by a Western, rather than a Byzantine scholar, ever written by a scholar whose native language was not a kind of Greek.
It rests entirely on direct observation of the ancient sources,
and remained the foundation of Greek lexicography deep into the 19th century, plagiarized by other lexicographers from the great Etienne family of the 16th century through Dupange to Paul Benedict Haase, the great German lexicographer of the 19th century.
Joseph Scaliger, a friend of mine, and one rarely given to praising other scholars, called Houdet the greatest Greek in Europe.
And Colton Mack, not in a publication, but in his chimney corner, sitting with his students, not a place where most of us show our charity.
It's true that we don't have a detailed, full-scale life study of Houdet's life works, but that's not because they lack historical importance, it's because it's simply too hard.
Like so many of the polymaths of the Renaissance,
Houdet wrote more than any modern scholar can imagine reading, possibly more than we can imagine lifting.
His crevices in difficult Latin and his personal correspondence in even more difficult classical creed fill four thick, ever-sprewn volumes in the very uncritical edition of his opera Omnia that appeared in Basel in the middle of the 15th century.
Small wonder that few have entered to explore even a small part of this forbidding territory.
Nonetheless, I hope to show that Uday's life as a reader offers great rewards to the historian of that wonderful subject.
Now, Uday always insisted that he was no great bookman, no brolier, no great collector.
He told Erasmus in the letter, I never spend an afternoon prowling around the Paris in the East, but of course he did so in the context of discussing a discovery he just made there.
Late in life, he insisted, when asked by his Italian acquaintance that his library had no special treasures, just the normal books you'd expect in a humanist's collection.
But there, of course, he may have hoped to avoid a request for a loan.
In fact, Oudet was closer to Brolier than he admitted,
He prepared, for example, spectacularly illuminated copies of his books, their title pages and cornucopia of flowers and butterflies and coins and medals for the members of the French royal family to whom he presented them.
Books which were, of course, opened once when received,
clapped shut and deposited in the Royal Library, and which lie to this day unread in that marmorial treasure house of Bibliopoli in Paris, where it's still quite difficult to obtain permission to open them.
Nonetheless, the man who orchestrated the production of these fine specimens of the bookmaker's art was not quite so distant from Broglie as he pretended to be.
He knew the books furnished a room.
Boudet finally was also a great reader, in the sense that Clavier and many of the other great collectors of the French Renaissance were not.
He came for a reading family.
Members of the French nobility of the road, the legal nobility to which he belonged, earned their vast wealth and high social position, their nobility of blood, not by their military prowess, not by their descent, like the nobles of the sword, but by their technical skills,
They were the keepers of the archives, the writers of official correspondence, the overseers of construction for the chateaus of the Loire Valley and the city halls that went up all over France in the first half of the 15th century.
A high level of literacy was vital to their work, and many of their large dark city houses in the Marais housed collections of as many as 500 to 1,500 books.
That's a very large number for the early 16th century.
Ipoda Mirandola's collection was extremely expensive and proverbially large, only a little over a thousand.
Thio's father, Jean Boudet, the new humanist, was an energetic collector who bought both manuscripts and printed books.
Humanist history flanking medieval theology on his shelves.
Jean's library must have been quite stately.
His arms added by illuminators to each book, manuscript, or printed.
Careful notes reporting what Paul Needham has very elegantly surmised must have been a uniform of rebinding and rearrangement of the library in the 1480s.
Jean was no pioneer as a bookman.
Jeubert Tuy, the French paleographer, has shown in work of the excitement of the detective novel that the Boudets were book buyers back deep into the 14th century, though most of their early co-holdings have to be identified by refined codicological channels.
Guillaume himself bought more books than his pessimistic comments might be one to expect.
His collection included manuscripts, especially of Greek works that haven't been printed, and printed books as well.
He read what he bought, he annotated what he read, and he entered his notes, as your handout will show you very soon, in a clear, distinctive Latin and Greek writing
that amfully confirmed the wise comment of my teacher, Arnaldo Mugano, a great man with good handwriting is twice a great man.
Nobody has yet tried to reconstruct Lube's library in full, and anybody who does so will have to grapple with the formidable difficulties that confront the historian of printed books with manuscript annotations.
This is a problematic category, neither fish nor meat.
then such books, even very important ones, often escape the legal eyes of curators dedicated either to print or to manuscripts.
Sometimes they rest unknown in the most orderly libraries, or at least not publicly catalogued, and only institutional and private memory enables them to be turned up.
A hundred years ago, Goudin's first bibliographer noted that his copy of the olden edition of Demosthenes was in the Poitiers of Staatsbibliote in Berlin.
In the course of a year in Berlin, I often had occasion to use the Aldean collection of that library, which is now in the great lurching yellow pile of the second Voiceschafts Bibliothek in the West, rather than the old grey stone pile of the first Voiceschafts Bibliothek in the East.
All of their Aldean books are supposedly there, but the Demosthenes was listed in no single catalogue and known to no single member of the staff.
Only when, by coincidence, I asked a very erudite member of the staff in the old, communist, crumbling Staatsbibliothek in the East, on the last day of my year in Berlin, did she remember an ancient crumbling handwritten list which gave a shelfmark for that book and told me to try it in the new, yellow Staatsbibliothek in the West.
Observers reliably informed me that I then set a speed record for the mile-long run-through heavy
Fortunately,
Great French students of bibliography and paleography, librarians by trade, have devoted serious study to the reconstruction of his collection, especially when we recall in the 19th century and Madame de Renfauré, who many of you here must know from working in the Grand Reserve in more recent times.
They have assembled a wide range of books and manuscripts that belong to him and are now harbored in collections from Berlin and Bremen to Princeton.
And what I'll offer you tonight is a big discussion from this enormous and extremely rich menu, a brief discussion of three for a few days' books.
His copy of Pliny, with Pliny's Younger Pliny Letters, which is in the Bosnian Library concert.
I've listed these three for the top of the first page of your handout.
This is a composite book, which consists of
Talipo Berolalba's 1498 edition of nine books of the letters, Girolamo Alonso's edition of parts of book 10, and some manuscript pages.
I'll come back to the complexities of that at a moment.
Secondly, his copy of the De Architectura of Vitruvius, the one great Roman work on architecture, now in Bibliotec Nacional, or possibly in Crosstown to Tobioc at this very moment, we don't know.
And finally,
out of a local pie, his copies of The Iliad and Odyssey of Homer, the first edition of 1488, which rests snugly in my native swamps in New Jersey in the Firestone Library.
Each of these association books is extremely well-authenticated, and that's not a trivial point.
Even though the Homer bears the words Homerus Budaei on its binding, the binding is a handsome 17th century addition to the Renaissance book.
Anybody who knows American rare book collections knows that wonderful 19th century habit of assuming that any book with German-looking script in it belonged to Philip Melanchthon.
So it's important that one's authentications are good.
Each of these books has been carefully studied.
But they haven't been studied from the standpoint of the history of reading, so much as from that of the history of classical scholarship, by philologists looking for what they can tell us about the descent of classical texts in modern times, or the skills that they brought to their correction and interpretation.
Hence, though well-localized, well-established, and scholarship reasonably well understood, each of those ones with new evidence for the history of reading in the early 16th century, and with moment-by-moment snapshots of the development of the great intellectuals' mind and sensibilities.
Now, all of these books coincide in some ways.
In the first place, they coincide in suggesting doubt about what seems to me a central, implicit dogma in the study of Renaissance books, a dogma which is reinforced by the organization of most national libraries.
That is, quite simply, that you can profitably study manuscripts and printed books of the same period in isolation from one another, an idea as odd as it is almost universally institutionalized, both in library organization and in scholarly organization.
For Boudet's basic ways as collector and reader made clear that he made no such declaration, made clear that no sharp chronological boundary marked off a manuscript from a printed way of reading in Boudet's experience, or I would argue in that of his contemporaries.
If you look, for example, at the very first page of your handout, which gives you the first page of Boudet's copy in Princeton,
You can see that the first initial is filled with a quite splendid illumination document, I promise you it is splendid, representing the arms of the Houdet family.
This appears in two other places in the document, and is the kind of personalization which Houdet, like many other readers,
continued to apply to printed books as his father and grandfather applied it to manuscripts in the past.
Anyone who saw the painted page in London and New York would need no further evidence that in doing so he was following the norms of his time.
Rudei read his copy of the Trivius, now in Paris, with Fra Giovanni Giocondo, an Italian architect and antiquary who built the bridge of Notre Dame in Paris between 1500 and 155, edited the oldian edition of Caesar, and made many other contributions to culture and scholarship.
His transcripts of Giocondo's technical comments and drawings, we see just a sample from these at the bottom of the page.
on, turned the margins of this book from one end to the other into a running
visual commentary on this difficult technical text, a commentary far more detailed than any commentary in print, until Jaconda's room commentary, which incorporates much of the superior, appears probably some 15 years after the time of their collective study.
Houdet, in other words, personalized his books and made each of them into a kind of unique scholarly entrance, as systematically as any manuscript reader beforehand,
In all three of these books, finally, the margins swan with notes.
And if you look at the second and third pages of your handout, you'll see some ridiculously clear specimens from this copy of Pliny in the bottom.
These take many forms, foliation numbers, cross-references, content summaries.
You see a whole bunch of those on the second page.
pointing hands instead of others .
To more sophisticated and unusual signs, like the horizontal lines that you see in a number of cases on page three.
This is the Greek opus, a critical mark of the Alexandrian scholars, which he there revived.
To some quite remarkable individual
and I'll just call your attention briefly to the second image on page five of the handout, where you see a rather elegant melancholy profile of the human face drawn by what was heard to be a significant passage in the original text.
All of these are entered with great care
Not simply substantive, but stylistic.
They're entered elegantly.
Ude clearly set out to turn each printed page into an artistically as well as an intellectually coherent commentary on the text in question.
Now, all of you know better than I that these ways of amitating texts were nothing new in Ude's time.
They're the standard maneuvers, the standard tactics of the reader of manuscripts established over the centuries before Boudet engaged in them.
The standard tactics of the medieval and Renaissance reader who wanted to make a text his own, bone of his own, flesh of his flesh.
The reader who wanted to mark every significant passage in his text.
with signs that would summarize and recall its meaning, the reader who wandered as Hansel and Greggel wandered through their wood, dropping colored stones, marking his text for rapid recovery and future use.
Many of these techniques came to be in the great age of manuscript standardization that Richard and Mary Rouse and others have written about, which accompanied the formation of medieval schools and universities.
In today's hands, paradoxically, they played the opposite role, transforming the uniform printed text into a highly individual, even a unique product, recording his individual response, his individual efforts to grapple with the text,
laid out in a visually appealing and memorable way that would speak to his character and intellect.
The presence of the pervasiveness of marks like these in Houdet's whole library, as well as its actual content, and manuscript, and printed,
Remind us of how problematic it is to shut off manuscripts for infringed books, as most of Europe's great libraries systematically do.
What it will take to get an early look into the cabinated monastery in Paris, once Tobias is running, is a thought that new makes one shudder.
It's never easy, but now it's going to be a nightmare.
Houdet's copy of Pliny makes this point most dramatically of all, because in this case, the text itself is a hybrid.
Pliny's letters had incredible adventures in the 15th and 16th centuries, as some of you will know.
They usually circulated in an incomplete form, only nine books long.
There were a fair number of manuscripts about around, and we could bust a history onward.
But early in the 16th century, another Italian humanist, Pietro Aleandra, discovered something riveting in the Parisian library of St.
Victor.
That's, of course, the library whose Caballon so wonderfully inherited to his list of Derandus' ten books on farting and other imaginary titles.
Well, the real library actually contained a manuscript written at the end of the fifth or the beginning of the sixth century of Pliny's letters, which was completely
which had not only the nine books normally in circulation, but the tenth of Pliny's riveting letters to the emperor Trajan about his service as governor in Virginia, including, of course, his famous confrontation with the members of an esoteric little sect called Christians, who were denounced to him and whom he had to interrogate and deal with as he truly reported to the emperor.
These are among the richest documents we have to this day for the actual day-to-day functioning of the Roman Empire, for the way in which the Roman elite lived and worked with its ruler in the first imperial age.
Alejandro was dazzled.
He was dazzled by the age of the manuscript, which was one of the rare cases when a humanist was actually right to say that he had better.
He was also dazzled by its content, copied it out, sent it to Giralmo Avanzo and Verona, who published it and came to as many of the new texts as he could.
But he didn't exhaust the material.
Well, along came Giocondo and did what the Italian humanists called discovering the manuscript again, this time in the technical sense of the Italian humanists.
Now, what an Italian humanist meant when he said he discovered a manuscript was that he went to a monastic library
whose inhabitants had preserved the book sedulously for a thousand years and copied texts, took the book, often stealing it and not giving it back, made it accessible to other people, denounced the barbarians who had kept it alive for a thousand years, and lent one credit as a great patron of the intellectual life.
And that's exactly what de Kondo did.
He took the book out of the library at St.
Victor,
Eventually, he sent a copy of it to Aldo Mamuzio, who published the first complete edition in 158, and somehow he managed to lose it, so that all that remains are six leaves now around the corner from here in the Morgan Library, identified early in the 20th century.
So it's a wonderful story of scholarship.
At all events, between the
Filching of the library from the book from St.
Victor, and sending the copy of it to Aldus, Jocondo showed it to Boudet, who saw that there were further materials in it, materials in neither of the printed texts, and had them copied out.
If you look at the bottom of your second page, you see, juxtaposed, a page of the printed text, and a page of the manuscript facsimile that Boudet had made.
He filled out his books with the unpublished letters.
So this book itself is a kind of metaphor for Boudet's library.
Printed book and manuscript text side by side, read and annotated in exactly the same way, mean both treasured.
This was the fullest copy of plenty of letters that anybody would have until all those editions came out in 158.
But neither scene is in any way radically or substantively different from the other.
All of Boudet's books
have this same combination of features, the uniform manufactured body uniquely detailed by the owner.
They represent the interaction of the uniform product with a personal aesthetic style as vividly as the chopped down, popped up Detroit convertible of an American teenager in 1956.
And they tell you just that that does something very powerful about the way in which a particular culture of consumption operated.
Now, the content of the annotations naturally matters and reveals even more than their form.
The notes in each of these books offer in different ways insights into their owners' ways of reading, thinking, and feeling that you could find nowhere else.
Now, it's natural that scholars, especially historians trained in the classics,
Look first of all for the technical when they examine a scholar's reactions to an ancient text.
We're trying to do that.
My friend and collaborator Lisa Jardine studying Gabriel Harvey's copy of the work on rhetoric in the Rosenbach collection in Philadelphia took down
every comment he had entered about the rhetorical figures.
Notice that he also told a long story about how Thomas More actually had shown his daughter naked to her fiancé, as the citizens of More's utopia did, but decided that wasn't really very interesting.
He left it out and came home without that in her notes, to be roundly abused by me, her husband, and everybody else, who couldn't have cared less about the rhetorical figures.
But this is how we read.
And the people who studied Boudet's clinic, great scholars, like E. A. Lowe and Rand, who began the work, and Merrill of Wesleyan, looked above all at his inundations.
There are interesting inundations here.
If you look at the bottom right of the second page, you see Boudet reading the words net legevantur,
seeing that they don't make sense, and writing immediately on the margin, negligate onto it.
They were neglected.
It was child's play for somebody like Boudet to see that when Pliny discussed history and said it should be an edema, that this term was out of place, and that it should really be a tema, a possession for always, as the Greek historian used to be said long before.
The list of Boudet's inundations to Pliny, to Vitruvius, and even to Homer is an imposing and an interesting one.
And that's what's really riveted the attention of classicists.
And reasonably enough, the Pliny alone is really an incredible document of the way in which the classical heritage somehow survives, despite scholars' every effort to destroy it.
And what if one of those great crossroads documents, like the Harley and Whippy in London, which both Petrarch and Lorenzo Bava worked on,
It's a point where medieval and modern scholarships, scribal energy and editorial intelligence somehow come together.
That's great technical fascination.
But Pliny was fascinated for more than technical reasons.
today across the centuries as bureaucrat to bureaucrat.
A kindred spirit.
An erudite man who cared deeply about the classics of his own day, who cared deeply about Latin style and eloquence, had plenty fascinated the day.
Many pages of the text are only annotated in the normal way with content summaries and the occasional short comment.
But if you turn to the third page of your handout, you'll see a few of the many moments in this book
where Boudet bursts into phosphorescent, enthusiastic annotations.
In the first of these, you find Pliny's description of his uncle, the great Pliny, author of the natural history, of how he worked all the time, how he always read and excerpted, he read nothing of which he didn't take notes, he was accustomed to say, there's no book so bad that you can't learn something from it.
He would keep little, he would work hard, and you see Boudet writing in the margins,
He followed the custom of the ancients in taking his food, just absolutely fascinated by the description of a model scholar.
In the second passage, which comes from my very favorite of Pliny's letters, Pliny describes how he gave an oration before the emperor.
He spoke for five hours while 12 big water clocks were empty.
He describes with a wonderful lack of self-consciousness how the emperor kept saying, Pliny, dear Pliny,
bury your voice.
And on the left, you see Boudet eagerly taking notes about the water clocks and the length of the speech.
Boudet reads this text in a very particular way.
He reads it on the one hand as the humanist seeking to understand the paraphernalia of official life, the precise nature of laws and institutions,
seeking to ground the texts in their historical context, to imagine them in their three dimensions.
But at the same time, he reads them as someone who hopes to live the life they describe, for whom historical learning is only the preparation for a powerful act of personal imitation.
And we'll see that his imitation of Pliny's, the elder Pliny's practices and readers, is very powerful indeed.
But Pliny wasn't all, but they had to be true again.
The more he read Pliny, the more he saw that he was reading about a society which in important ways repelled him.
He saw, for example, that Pliny, that great bureaucrat and classical scholar, was not only no Christian, but regarded Christians with the amusement and contempt that we would now expect from an educated woman.
In the last passage on this page, when Pliny's great letter happened for Christians who were denounced to him,
He describes the libellus without an author, which contained the names of communists in the State Department, Christians, and divinity.
He describes how he had asked them to worship the divine image of the emperor, and some had been willing to, and others weren't.
Eventually, he'll go on to talk about the use of torture.
Pliny and Trajan were very moderate.
Trajan told Pliny not to pay attention to anonymous denunciations, a principle which later rulers have not always harkened to.
But Goudet, of course, was horrified to realize that one of his beloved Romans was so decadently and sharply
a hater of Christianity.
In the margin he writes, What you see in these and other places is a dialectic between his fascination with the Roman imperial world and his horror at its distant
hating him, the impossibility of imitating him as a whole.
And if others ask, well, it's possible to speak today, even in his earliest stage as a scholar, when in public he insisted, as Erasmus did in those days, that Christianity and classicism could be reconciled, that there were no fundamental contradictions between them.
In private, you see him in the margins of his books, worried about dilemmas that in public he wouldn't admit.
In his copy of Polyvius, for example, in Book 6, which has the great description of the Roman funeral ceremony, which Polyvius argues was the glue that held all of Roman society together.
Boudet writes one word, eisa daimonia, superstition.
And in his will, written not long after, he forbids the days to hold any funeral ceremony for it on the grounds that funeral ceremonies are a pagan, not a Christian institution, not fit for Christians.
It is the great drama of the northern, as opposed to the Italian Renaissance, that its votaries like Erasmus and Ude were committed with equal passion to Christian and to classical scholarship, and that in the course of time, in the age of the Reformation, they came to see that these two aims might be contradictory.
This great drama which expresses itself, for example, in Erasmus' Ciceronianus, where he denounces the Roman humanists at this time for calling God Luther Optimus Maximus.
This drama can already be seen in microscopic form in Ude's margins 20 years before it reached him.
Ude's copy is truly a fascinating quite different way.